# Instructions for Matt

## 1. Simulated Test Case Generation

This Python script is used to generate simulation test cases for `HLA-EM.py`

### Usage

To run the script, you can use the following command-line arguments:

```
python3 src/simulate_reads.py [options]
```

### Available Options

- `-r`, `--hla_fasta_path`: Specifies the path to the HLA FASTA file. Default is 0.
- `-m`, `--masked_genome_path`: Specifies the path to the masked genome directory. Default is 0.
- `-n`, `--num_test_cases`: Specifies the number of samples per test case. Default is 5.
- `--num_hla_reads`: Specifies the number of HLA reads to generate. Default is 1500.
- `-l`, `--loh_number`: Specifies the number of alleles to lose heterozygosity. Default is 0.
- `-e`, `--error_rate`: Specifies the error rate for `wgsim`. Default is 0.01.
- `-h`, `--help`: Displays the help message and exits.

### Example Usage

To generate the test cases we talked about previously (5 test cases of each of the following treatments: `100,000`, `50,000`, `10,000`, `5,000`, & `1,500` HLA reads out of `1,000,000` reads total) use the following command:

```
python3 src/simulate_reads.py -r /PATH/TO/hla-em/hla_gen.fasta -m /PATH/TO/hla-em/EnsembleGenome_STAR_without_scaffolds
```

To increase the number of samples per treatment to 10, add `-n 10`.

The script will first recreate a fasta file from the masked STAR index directory. Then it will begin generating test cases within the `reference` directory. It uses `TCGA_HLA_alleles.tsv` as a reference for HLA alleles. Half of the test cases at each treatment use the most common genotype matching the TCGA data (best case scenario), and the other half use a random genotype matching the TCGA data (harder scenario). The script will also generate a `allele_record.csv` file in the `reference` directory that contains the paths to the test cases, their respective treatments, and expected genotypes.

## 2. Running HLA-EM on Samples

I wrote the bash script `run_hla_em_pipeline.sh` to automate the process of running HLA-EM on each of the test cases generated by `simulate_reads.py`. I don't have a copy of the job scripts we used while I was at WUSTL so I can't automate submitting the jobs to the cluster, but hopefully this is close enough to modify. If you have a job script template you wanted to send me I'm sure I could modify this script to work with it as well.

The script loops through each of the samples in the `reference` directory and runs HLA-EM on each one. (the number of samples will have to be adjusted based on the number of test cases generated)

### Usage

To run the script, you can use the following command-line arguments:

```
bash run_hla_em_pipeline.sh
```

## 3. Running Optitype on Samples

Because Optitype requires first masking non-HLA reads from the fastq files, I streamlined the process by retaining the masked bam files from the HLA-EM pipeline for later use in the Optitype step. Thus the HLA-EM pipeline must be run before the Optitype pipeline.

I wrote the bash script `run_optitype.sh` to automate the process of running Optitype on each of the test cases generated by `simulate_reads.py`. (the number of samples will have to be adjusted based on the number of test cases generated)

### Usage

To run the script, you can use the following command-line arguments:

```
bash run_optitype.sh
```

## 4. Evaluating Results

I wrote the Python script `evaluate_results.py` to evaluate the results of the HLA-EM and Optitype pipelines. The script compares the predicted genotypes to the expected genotypes and calculates the accuracy of each pipeline.
It saves a csv file of the results in the user's Downloads folder. This file contains the expected and predicted genotypes for each sample. It also records the mean accuracy of each trial per typing level (two, four, six, and eight digit).

### Usage

To run the script, you can use the following command-line arguments:

```
bash evaluate_results.sh
```

--------------------------------

# Rest of HLA-EM README

HLA-EM is an HLA genotyping tool that utilizes an expectation maximization algorithm to identify a patient's HLA genotype in a sample from RNA-seq data. 



## HLA-EM Prerequisites
  - [python](https://www.python.org/) (v 3+)
    - [NumPy](http://http://www.numpy.org/)
    - [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/)
    - [whichcraft](https://pypi.org/project/whichcraft/)
  - [STAR](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR)
    - to compile STAR, you may need to install [CMAKE](https://cmake.org/) or [gcc](https://gcc.gnu.org/)
  - [SAMtools](http://samtools.sourceforge.net/)

Rather than installing each prerequisite manually, it is recommended to use the Docker image. This image includes all necessary dependencies and eliminates the need for manual installations. To use the Docker image, follow the steps below:

### Using Docker Image
  1. Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) on your machine.
  2. Pull the Docker image:

     ```bash
     docker pull zeliason/hla_em:latest
     ```

  3. Run your application within the Docker container:

     ```bash
     docker run -it --rm -v /path/to/hla-em/src:/src zeliason/hla_em:latest [OPTIONS]
     ```
  
## Input
Running HLA-EM with the -h option (or --help) will print a desciption of its optional and required input arguments.  A description of each follows.

```
HLA-EM.py [-h] [-t THREADS] [-r REFERENCE] [--starHLA STARHLA] [-o OUTNAME]
          [-d] [--tpm TPM] [-p] [-k] [-v] -s STARGENOME reads1 [reads2]
```

### Optional arguments
- `-h`, `--help`  
      Prints the help menu, which contains an example of the function usage and abbreviated explanations of each of the options.
- `-t`, `--threads` THREADS  
     Some portions of the HLA-EM pipeline support multithreading; if you wish to use this feature, set this to the number of cores available (default: 1)
- `-r`, `--reference` REFERENCE  
     HLA-EM includes a comprehensive set of HLA reference genes maintained by [IMGT, the international ImMunoGeneTics Database](https://github.com/ANHIG/IMGTHLA/blob/Latest/hla_gen.fasta), the use of which is recommended.  However, if you wish to supply your own HLA gene reference file in FASTA format, use this option with the path to the file
- `-a`, `--annotation` ANNOTATION  
       A file of HLA gene annotations in TSV format to be used in place of the default HLA gene annotations [$INSTALLDIR/reference/hla_gene_annot.tsv]
- `--starHLA` STARHLA
     path to a directory containing STAR-generated HLA genome indexes based on the reference FASTA
- `-o`, `--outname` OUTNAME  
     Prefix attached to output file names (default: ./hlaEM)
- `-d`, `--disabledust`  
     By default, HLA-EM filters low-complexity reads using the DUST algorithm.  Specify this option to disable filtering
- `--tpm` TPM  
     TPM threshold for identifying a true positive HLA genotype (default: 1.48)
- `-p`, `--printem`  
     Causes HLA-EM to print its results to STDOUT
- `-k`, `--keepint`  
     By default, HLA-EM removes files generated by intermediate steps of the pipeline. Specify this option to keep these files
- `-v,` `--version`  
     Print program's version number and exit

### Required arguments
- -s STARGENOME, --stargenome STARGENOME  
     Path to the directory containing STAR-generated human genome index files

### Positional arguments
- reads1 : A FASTQ file of single-end RNA-seq reads or the first of two paired-end FASTQs 
- reads2 : (optional) Second paired-end FASTQ file  

## Output
- The final genotype prediction is written to `OUTNAME.final_predictions.csv`.
- The results of the EM algorithm are written to `OUTNAME.emresults.tsv`. Its rows follow the format:
  
      HLAtype   MappedReads   MappedProportion   MLE_Reads   MLE_Probability

- The read coverage maps for each predicted HLA type are written to `OUTNAME.*.cov.pdf`.
- Pie charts comparing MappedProportion and MLE_Probability for the predicted genotypes are written to `OUTNAME.props.pdf`.
- The results of CreateMappedReadTable (a table of filtered HLA reads and references) are written to `OUTNAME.mappedReads.tsv`.
- BAM files containing reads aligned to the HLA reference genomes are written to `OUTNAME.1.Aligned.*.bam`.


[//]: # (This is a table including each HLA type with at least one read mapped to it, indicating the number of mapped reads, the proportion of all reads mapped to the HLA reference genomes mapped to this type, the MLE of the expected number of reads for this HLA type, and the MLE probability of this HLA type.)

[//]: # ()
[//]: # (The first two lines indicate how may steps the algorithm took to converge and the maximum likelihood estimate &#40;MLE&#41; of the sequencing error rate.  )

[//]: # ()
[//]: # (In addition to the results table, HLA-EM also generates read coverage maps for each HLA type with a non-zero MLE probability &#40;OUTNAME.\*.cov.pdf&#41; and a visualization of the difference between the mapped reads proportions and MLE probabilites &#40;OUTNAME.props.pdf&#41;.  The reads aligned to the HLA references are also recorded in BAM format &#40;OUTNAME.aligned.\*.bam&#41;.)
